## PZL-23 Karas in Romanian service

After 17 September 1939 no less than 21 Karas A and B aircraft of the Polish army aviation flights and training units were evacuated to Romania. The Romanians overhauled these Karaśes. By cannibalisation they obtained 19 serviceable aircraft, to which they applied the serials 1 to 19. Some of these had external features of both Karas versions. The type was identified as PZL 23 Karas on the tail, with no version suffix.

The Karaśes were grouped together at the 1st Bomber Flotilla at Brasov. According to Romanian sources, by late 1940 there were some 12 serviceable PZL 23Bs at Brasov. Other Karaśes (mainly the PZL.23 As) were handed over for training duties. Several damaged ones were sent for repair.

On 26 November 1940 the Romanians established the 3 Bomber Flotilla at Craiova. This included the 73rd Bomber Squadron, previously part of the 2 Flotilla. In early 1941 the 73rd Squadron, which had used Italian Savoia 79B bombers previously, was equipped with the PZL 23 Karaś. Capt. Dumitru Deica was appointed as the Squadron CO. After half a year's training, the flight attained operational capability by late July 1941 and, together with the 18th Bomber Squadron (equipped with IAR 37 aircraft), it formed the 6th Bomber Group, an integral component of 3 Flotilla.

73rd Squadron did not take part in the Besarabia fighting that formed the first stages of Operation "Barbarossa". On 3 August 1941 the unit's Karaśes flew from Craiova to the operational airfield at Ialoveni (south of Kishinev/Chisinau, Republic of Moldova). Two days later the Squadron CO, Capt. Deica, with Lt. Dumitru Cernaianu and LAC Gheorghe Ilie in Karaś no. 12 flew the first combat sortie, reconnaissance of Soviet units on the river Dnestr/Nistru. On 6 August 1941 eight Karaśes (including aircraft nos. 1, 2, 8, 12, 16, 17, 18) bombed Soviet troops in the area of Karargi-Buzinovo. AA defence damaged the engine of Karaś no. 1 with the crew of S/Lt Tiberiu Popescu, S/Lt Anghel Nedelcu and LAC Gheorghe Lobanovici. The pilot managed to bring the aeroplane back to own lines at Tighina, but during the forced landing the Karas overturned and was written off. The wounded gunner was taken to hospital in Kishinev/Chisinau. In August and September 1941 the 73rd Squadron flew a number of bomber attacks in support of the Romanian 4th Army advancing on Odessa. On 3 September the unit moved to Tiraspol (on the Dnestr/Nistru) which allowed it to participate more effectively in fighting. While operating from the new airfield the Karaśes carried out many attacks against Soviet positions at Aleksandrovka, Dalnik, Holodnaya, Neuburg, Tatarka and in Odessa. Air operations assisted the Romania 4th Army troops in breaking through Russian defences at Dalnik (6 October) and in the direct attack on Odessa. The city was captured on 16 October 1941. Soon afterwards, on 20 October, the 73rd Squadron was withdrawn from the front line and returned to its permanent base at Craiova. 6th Group together with the 73rd Squadron was partitcularily active all through this phase of Barbarossa, actively supporting Romania's Fourth Army push, and was mentioned in despatches several times.

In the first half of 1942 the unit returned to action. The Karaśes were used to patrol the Black Sea coast. In June one of them failed to return from a sortie over the sea.

In the autumn of 1942 the 73rd Squadron was moved to Stalingrad. Its aircraft operated from the airfields at Takhchinskaya and Moro-zovskaya, flying numerous reconnaissance and bombing missions in adverse weather against Russian troops on the river Don. In January 1943, after the Axis defeat there, the Karases were evacuated to Romania. In mid-1943 the 73rd Squadron converted to the Junkers Ju-87 D-3 Stuka. Twelve serviceable Karaśes were transferred to a second-line unit known simply as the "PZL Squadron". In April 1944 the flight joined the reserve grenadier regiment. It was going to take part in harassing night attacks and to this end the Karaśes were fitted with cassette carriers for 1 kg shrapnel bombs. Information about possible combat use of the unit is lacking. When Romania moved to the Allied side on 23 August 1944 the flight had 10 aircraft, of which half were airworthy. At the war's end the Romanian Air Force had only a few Karaśes. The last ones were withdrawn from service in 1946.

## Painting and markings

The Romanian Karases were painted overall RAF Dark Green and light blue (there is no photographic evidence of a two-tone brown-green camouflage on upper surfaces, albeit some colour profiles show that); they wore the standard Romanian Michael's cross (some wearing a distinct variation of it, with thicker blue outlines); before May 1941, they were the Romanian roundel, asymetrically placed only on upper and lower wings.
