## P-51B-5-NA, s/n 43-6315, Lt. Col. James H. Howard, CO of 356th FS, 354th FG, 9th AF, Lashenden, United Kigdom,

The nickname "Ding Hao" was a Chinese expression for good luck that Jim Howard brought to Europe from his service in the Far East, where he flew with the AVG. Howard was recruited from VF-6 to go to China and became the Assistant Squadron Leader of the Second Pursuit Squadron “Hell’s Angels” with the American Volunteer Group, the Flying Tigers. He was credited with six victories with the AVG (more precisely: 2.33 aerial victories - two solo, and one shared, and four destroyed on the ground). His Curtiss Hawk 81 carried the number 57 on the aft fuselage. He was one of two Flying Tigers who would go on to earn the Medal of Honor, the other being USMC Major Gregory “Pappy” Boyington. The number of kill marks on his Mustang is misleading, as Howard did not actually down six Japanese aircraft during his service with the Flying Tigers, in 1941-1942. On January 11, 1944, he single-handedly faced a group of about 30 Luftwaffe fighters while protecting a group of bombers (the famous One Man Air Force Mission). During the action, he shot down four aircraft and damaged several others, and in the following days he added two more victories. Due to pressure from the USAAF propaganda department, he had allowed S/Sgt Marcus Hanson to paint six rising suns on his his aircraft in addition to six swastikas, even though this did not correspond to his solo air combat achievements with the AVG. Howard's Mustang later became one of the first Mustangs in the 354 FG to be equipped with a Malcolm hood canopy, which was highly valued by P-51B pilots.

11 January 1944: Major James Howell Howard, Air Corps, United States Army, commander of the 356th Fighter Squadron, 354th Fighter Group, Ninth Air Force, led fifty P-51 Mustangs escorting three divisions of B-17 Flying Fortresses on a raid against Oschersleben, near Berlin, Germany. As defending Luftwaffe fighters attacked the bomber formation, Major Howard immediately went on the offensive and shot down a twin engine Messerschmitt Bf 110 Zerstörer long range fighter. During this engagement, Howard became separated from his group, but climbed back to rejoin the bombers. More than thirty German fighters were attacking the bomber formation and Major Howard single-handedly went after them. He shot down two, probably shot down two more and damaged at least another two. He continued to attack even after he had run out of ammunition and was low on fuel. When he returned to his base at RAF Boxted, his Mustang had just a single bullet hole. For this action, James H. Howard was awarded the Medal of Honor, presented by Lieutenant General Carl Spaatz on 11 January 1945. He is the only fighter pilot in the European Theater to have received this Medal. Howard was promoted to the rank of colonel.

Major Howard may have flown a different airplane than 43-6315 on 11 January 1944. A handwritten caption of the reverse of the top photograph reads, “Howard in own P-51B at Boxted, 25/4/44 not AC in which he won MOH, Lt Col James Howard was awarded only Medal of Honour (highest US Award) to go to a fighter pilot flying in the ETO. Action on 11/1/44.“. Also, this source <https://www.warbirdinformationexchange.org/phpBB3/viewtopic.php?p=641099> mentions "Howard was flying P-51B s/n 43-6441 AJ+X "The Prodigal Son" on Jan 11, 1944. His first assigned a/c was P-51B s/n 43-6374 AJ+A "Ding Hao"." 43-6315 (Model: NA-104, construction #: 104-22818, re-coded AJ+S) was shot down by AAA E of Caen, France July 23, 1944, pilot fate unkown (MACR 7473). There was a modern recreation of "Ding Hao" - NA P-51D-25-NA Mustang 44-72917/G-HAEC, painted up as "Ding Hao" for the Memphis Belle movie (now repainted as "Big Beautifull Doll"). 

## References

- <https://www.thisdayinaviation.com/11-january-1944/>
- Eduard instructions for kit number 84209
- <https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2022/01/26/north-american-p-51b-mustang-ding-hao-of-james-h-howard/>
- <https://forgottenprops.warbirdsresourcegroup.org/p51b-mustang-436313-436802.html>
- <https://www.warbirdinformationexchange.org/phpBB3/viewtopic.php?p=641099>


