### Photo Info

- Figure 1:
  3rd Tactical Fighter Squadron McDonnell Douglas F-4E-49-MC Phantom c/n 4242
  71-1073 Clark AB, Philippines 1976. Retired to AMARC as FP0649 Apr 5, 1991.
  Still on AMARC inventory Jan 15, 2008, one of the last QF-4E's to be shor
  down as a drone in 2016.
- Figure 2 and 3 (Meng Model colour profiles)
  F-4E-49-MC Phantom c/n 4242
  71-1073 Clark AB, Lt.Cdr. Livingstone / Maj. Miyamoto,
  Philippines, May 1991 (month is clearly wrong, April most probably)
- Other images: 73-1198 and 73-1199

### Gulf War

#### Dates and unit

- 16 February - 31 March 1991
- 3rd TFS/3rd TFW "Peugeots", Clark AFB, Phillipines, tail code "PN" - Incirlik AB, Turkey

#### Activity
 **Sources**

- [DStorm site](https://dstorm.eu/pages/en/usa/f-4e.html)
- Smoke Trails, Vol. 7, No. 3:

**Deployment to the Persian Gulf**

- unit notified of deployment to the Persian Gulf on Thursday, February 14, 1991;
- itinerrary: Clak AFB (Phillippinness) -> Anderson AFB (Guam)
  -> Hickam AFB (Hawaii) -> George AFB (California) -> McGuire AFB (New Jersey)
- 10 aircraft to fly to Anderson AFB (Guam): 5 + 5 (two five-ships);
- departure Saturday 16 February; send-off was supposed to be muted due to Phillippinnes
  Communist Party vouching to shoot US Air Force personnel if any deployed to Desert Storm;
  send-off was not muted;
- once at Anderson AFB, eight aircraft to go on to Hickam AFB;
- the Turkish government allowed **only four** F-4Es in Turkey;
  by then Lt. Col. Craig Lightfoot had six aircraft and seven crews;
- Lightfoot put his primary go-to crews in four jets for Incirlik, plus another crew that went
  via Rhein-Mainz Germany (Beissner/Ricarte); the other two jets went to Spangdahlem AFB, Germany;
- Datse is now February 20, 1991; Lightfoot has: 71-086, 72-1407, 73-1198, 73-1199 at Incirlik, and seven crews;
  Two others, 71-1075 and ??? were stuck at Spangdahlem AB, Germany;
- The unit's AN/AVQ-26 Pave Tack pods were stuck in a transport at Hickam AFB,
  and did not arrive in time for combat use. Instead they used CBU-87D cluster bomb units;
- The unit's first combat action was slated for February 22, 1991, when they had to fly a SAM and AAA suppression
  mission for F-16's against Al Mosul, Iraq. Target was the chemical plant that was manufacturing
  warheads for Scud missiles; **that mission got cancelled**;
- First actual combat mission was on February 24, 1991;
- 73-1198 and 73-1199 were flying the first 3rd TFS Combat Mission dropping 2 x CBU-87/D each.
  73-1199 was lead, marked as 13th AF flagship; 73-1198 was the only one without a shark mouth;
  Flight lead was Capt. J.D. Ramsey with WSO Mark Houtzner. Capt. Ramsey switched jets at the
  step desk so he could fly 73-1199 since 73-1198 did not carry the shark teeth, since some
  congressman was flying with the pre-strike tanker supposedly taking pictures;
- February 25, 1991: grounded, bad weather;
- February 26, 1991: two-ship strike mission: Heater/Hume, and Grip/Ricarte:
  no drop due to incorrect coordinate input in the AN/ARN-101; Grip/Ricarte were
  good wingmen, so they too aborted the drop;
- February 27, 1991: another mission, crews: Foster/Nieves, and Trinch/Mauer;
  good drop even if done in the middle of a thunderstorm;




**Ordnance configuration**

Ordnance configurations were the same for all combat missions, all aircraft:
- a single CBU-87/D on each of the inboard pylons, the left one suspended from
  "special weapons" adapter (the special weapons adapter was screwed directly to
  the inboard pylon where the MAU-12 was usually located. Therefore the pylon did
   not feature any sway braces anymore.)
- AIM-9 missile rails were in place on the left inboard pylon, but no Sidewinder
  missiles were carried
- AIM-7F's in the two rear Sparrow wells
- "deep" ALQ-131(V)-14 in left front Sparrow well, right front well unused
- two 370 gallon fuel tanks on outer wing pylons
- 600 gallon fuel tank on centerline

**Post Desert Storm**

- A Pave Tack laser designation mission was set for February 28, 1991,
  with Capt. J.D. Ramsey with WSO Mark Houtzner, but was
  cancelled due to the cease fire. Planes were loaded, but did not fly, with:
  - Paveway GBU-10C/B's mounted directly to the each inboard pylon (target was Airbus A300 -
    there was a ceasefire so no mission was executed)
  - AN/AVQ-26 Pave Tack on centerline, replacing 600 gallon tank
  - two 370 gallon fuel tanks on outer wing pylons
- All aircraft were AN/ARN-101 and TISEO equipped. All planes left Turkey 19 March 1991
  (after the unit taught the Turks how to air refuel), and went directly to AMARC at Davis-Monthan AFB
  (ie the boneyard) on 25 March 1991 via stops at McGuire, Robbins and Kirtland AFBs.
- Airframe 72-1407 was transferred June 1991 to Keflavik AFB, Iceland. There it was resprayed as F-4E
  66-0300 which was the last F-4E to leave Keflavik at 11/1985.

