## Romanian operations: Henschel Hs-129 of the Romanian Grupul 8 Asalt, 1944

In addition to the Luftwaffe, Henschel Hs 129 were in service with the Royal Romanian Air Force. The Romanian I Air Corps included the 8th Assault Group (Grupul 8 Asalt), which included the 41st, 42nd and 60th squadrons. The command of the 1st Romanian air corps was operationally subordinate to the headquarters of the 4th Air Fleet of the Luftwaffe, although the Romanians operated both in the sector of the 4th and in the area of responsibility of the 6th Air Fleet.

On 7 January 1944 Grupul 8 moved to Lepetika, Ukraine. A couple of accidents caused the group to loose some of its best pilots. First cpt. av. Alfred Conrad was killed during a training flight. On 27 January, slt. av. Ion Buda was returning from Romania with a repaired Hs-129. He had taken adj. av. Teodor Zăbavă (the ace of the 8th Assault Group) as a passenger in the fuselage. Because of the fog, the airplane crashed, killing both pilots. At the beginning of February, the 42nd and 60th Squadrons moved back to Nikolaev. The 41st remained at Lepetika. A new CO, cdor. av. Luchian, took over the group. On 1 February adj. av. Victor Dumbravă was hit by Soviet AAA during a mission. The left engine was knocked out and he had to make a belly landing. Adj. av. Vasile Pascu landed close to him. Dumbravă ran towards the other Henschel, over a frozen lake. The ice broke and he fell in. Soaking wet, he finally reached Pascu and climbed on the airplane. Pascu managed to take off from the snow with difficulty and safely took him to Lepetika, where the frozen Dumbravă received immediate medical treatment. Adj. Pascu was cited on the entire Air Corps. On 2 April 1944, the 8th Assault Group was redeployed to Romania, at Tecuci. A new commander took over: cpt. cdor. av. Gheorghe Botez. As the Soviets had entered Romanian soil, the missions came one after another, until around 20 April, when things settled down. 11 pilots left the group temporarily in order to bring new aircraft from Poland. These arrived just in time for to take part in the battle of Targu-Frumos.

On 1 May the group carried out 40 sorties, mostly without fighter cover. It took two missions (one with 5 a/c and the other with 11) to deal severe damage to the Soviet troops near the village Bals. Large explosions were seen. Ten Henschels then struck targets west of Băiceni and another nine attacked east of Băiceni. The last mission was against the village of Hărmănesti, just as a Ju-88 formation was approaching the area. About 40 sorties were flown that day. But the next day, the Soviets started their attack on a line between Liteni (10 km N of Targu-Frumos) and the river Moldova. But the line was kept, generally speaking. The most serious situation was between Giurgesti and the river Siret, where about 30-40 Soviet tanks penetrated as far as Helesteni. The 8th Assault Group struck Soviet forces advancing on Dealul Ciobanului (Shepheard's Hill) and the Soviet armored formation north of Helesteni, destroying three tanks. A third formation attacked the Principele Nicolae village. However, the Soviets managed to advance 1.5 km south of Bals. One Hs-129 was hit by AAA, but the pilot managed to make a belly-landing behind friendly lines. The Soviet offensive continued on 3 May. The 8th Assault Group attacked in the Ruginoasa area, bombing the tanks that had reached the Dâmbrovicioara Hill and strafing the support infantry. A second mission was flown against Soviet light artillery on the same hill (approx 1 km S of Ruginoasa). A third formation returned in the area later and attacked tanks, but VVS P-39s forced half of them to break formation. On 4 May, the 8th Assault Group flew two missions, totalling 33 sorties. The first one was against a Soviet column N of Helesteni. Two tanks were destroyed. The second formation struck Soviet infantry 3km S of Ruginoasa and destroyed a section AT guns. They were shortly engaged by VVS fighters in the area and even Il-2s. But the Romanian and German fighters intervened and they got away. On 12 May, during an attack against a Soviet infantry and tank column, adj. maj. av. Stefan Pucas saw several Il-2s heading towards Romanian lines. After dropping his bombs he attacked the lead aircraft of the enemy formation. The 20mm shells hit the Soviet's ammunition and the Sturmovik exploded in midair. Throughout the rest of May, the group continued to fly missions in support of the troops on the front. Thus on 1 June 1944, it was reduced to only 15 serviceable aircraft, but it still managed to fly 66 sorties, dropping 35 tons of bombs. On 30 June 1944, the group moved to the Matca-Tecuci airfield, from where it continued to carry out its missions. On 3 July, adj. maj. av. Pucas and adj. av. Victor Dumbravă shot down an Il-2 each.

## German operations: IV. Gruppe (Pz)/Schlachtgeschwader 9

According to the order of October 18, 1943, the organization and designation system of the units of attack aircraft and dive bombers of the Luftwaffe changed. Air regiments of dive bombers were transformed into assault ones. The former Sch.G 1 and Sch.G 2 were disbanded and served as the basis for the creation of new tank destroyer units. By order of the same October 18, 1943, a new formation was created - IV (Panzer) / Schlachtgeschwader 9 and the unit designations were changed: FuPz became the headquarters of the IV (anti-tank) group SG 9. 4. (Pz) / Sch.G 1 became 10. ( Pz)/SG 9, 8.(Pz)/Sch.G I became ll.(Pz)/SG 9, 4.(Pz)/Sch.G 2 was renamed to 12.(Pz)/SG 9, 8, (Pz)/Sch.G 2 became 13.(Pz)/SG 9 and finally Panzerjagerstaffell/JG51 became 14.(Pz)/SG 9. 10., 12. and 14. Staffelen of IV. Gruppe (Pz)/SG 9 (4th Group, anti-tank, of Attack Wing 9) were based around Roman, Bacau and Iasi in the spring/early summer of 1944. A key feature of operations around Târgu Frumos was effective Axis coordination (German-Romanian, and combined arms): German and Romanian Hs 129 B-2 units operated in parallel and sometimes overlapping missions directed toward: immediate threats (breakthrough attempts) and concentration zones of Soviet armour. Air support was closely tied to ground-based anti-tank defenses and rapid German armoured counterattacks, this integration made both Romanian and German Hs-129s' impact greater than their numbers alone would suggest.

## References

- <http://www.worldwar2.ro/arr/?action=print&article=579>
- <https://asisbiz.com/Luftwaffe/sg9.html>
