## Modeller's notes

- 52nd TFW Spangdahlem:
  - 23rd TFS (blue tail band)
  - 81st TFS (yellow tail band)
  - 480th TFS (bright red tail band)
- example decals: Xtradecal 1/48 (X48005) for USAFE No 1. (3) McDonnell F-4G Phantom 69-295/69-250/69-252 shark mouth 52TFW SP; Lockheed-Martin F-16C 86-227 480TFS 52TFW shark mouth SP; 85-479 527AS coded 01 WR Bentwaters
- from said decal sheet: F-16C 86-0227:
  - Block 30C (small mouth, s/n pre-dates big mouth MCID starting 86-0261)
  - delivered August 1987
  - deployed in Desert Storm, relocated to Incirlik AB, part of 7440 Composite Wing; SP+AF86-227 tail code, 23rd TFS (though note the red tail band), possible shark mouth too
  - deployed in Operation Freedom Sentinel (2015) with 457th TFS
  - retired August 2016

## Hunter-killers of Spangdahlem
(reference <https://www.key.aero/article/spangdahlems-hunter-killers>)

For a period in the late 1980s and early 1990s different generations of USAF fast jets worked together in the suppression of enemy air defences role. Doug Gordon examines this unusual arrangement at Spangdahlem which saw the F-16 working with the F-4G as Wild Weasel hunter/killer teams.

Following withdrawal from South Vietnam between 1973 and 1975, the armed forces of the United States entered a period of introspection concerning the conduct of the war and the lessons to be learnt. The USAF had been unexpectedly mauled by the North Vietnamese air defences throughout the conflict. Of the approximately 1,700 combat losses, the majority were due to radarguided anti-aircraft artillery (AAA), with the remainder shot down by other forms of ground fire, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) or enemy aircraft.

Quite clearly this attrition rate was unacceptable and in the years following the end of the conflict the USAF accepted its tactics and doctrines were outdated. To counter losses by enemy aircraft the air force established the Fighter Weapons School at Nellis AFB, Nevada. It also instigated the concept of dissimilar air combat training (DACT); establishing aggressor units at Nellis, RAF Alconbury, Cambridgeshire and Clarke AB in the Philippines.

**F-4 PHANTOM TRIBUTE**

Following withdrawal from South Vietnam between 1973 and 1975, the armed forces of the United States entered a period of introspection concerning the conduct of the war and the lessons to be learnt. The USAF had been unexpectedly mauled by the North Vietnamese air defences throughout the conflict. Of the approximately 1,700 combat losses, the majority were due to radarguided anti-aircraft artillery (AAA), with the remainder shot down by other forms of ground fire, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) or enemy aircraft.

Quite clearly this attrition rate was unacceptable and in the years following the end of the conflict the USAF accepted its tactics and doctrines were outdated. To counter losses by enemy aircraft the air force established the Fighter Weapons School at Nellis AFB, Nevada. It also instigated the concept of dissimilar air combat training (DACT); establishing aggressor units at Nellis, RAF Alconbury, Cambridgeshire and Clarke AB in the Philippines.

To address the problems with the AAA and SAM threats it sought to modify and upgrade its suppression of enemy air defences (SEAD) doctrine which had its origins in 1965. This was when the USAF had tentatively developed the Wild Weasel concept for attacking and neutralising enemy ground-to-air defences. It had led to the specially modified variants of the North American F-100F Super Sabre and Republic F-105F Thunderchief; both of which served in this role with varying degrees of success. During the war it was also decided to modify McDonnell Douglas F-4C Phantom IIs for the role. This would be the first of a number of Phantom variants for this mission, and for a period the F-4G model worked in unison with the F-16 Fighting Falcon.

**A NEW VARIANT**

The 52nd Tactical Fighter Wing’s first Wild Weasel hunter/killer teams were made up of the F-4E and F-4G. Each of the wing’s units, the 23rd, 81st and 480th Tactical Fighter Squadrons, flew both types. The F-4G was developed from the F-4E especially for the SEAD role. It was fitted with the AN/APR-38 radar homing and warning (RHAW) system which could locate and identify radar emitters. This equipment was installed in the nose, replacing the F-4E’s cannon; and was later updated to the AN/APR-47. The weapons used for this purpose were the AGM-65 Maverick missile and AGM-78 Standard Anti- Radiation Missile (StARM). The latter sought to address the deficiencies of the AGM-45 Shrike, the main SEAD weapon used in Vietnam, which could be defeated by the enemy radar operator switching his system off so there were no signals to home in on. However, the AGM-78 had limited range and speed. In 1986, the more advanced AGM-88 High-Speed Anti-Radiation Missile (HARM) entered service.

For self-protection the F-4G could carry four AIM-7 Sparrow air-to-air missiles under the fuselage and four AIM-9 Sidewinders in pairs on the two inboard wing pylons. The AN/ALQ-131 electronic countermeasures pod would also be carried; albeit displacing an AIM-7 on one of the forward fuselage hardpoints. The F-4G could also use a variety of conventional and cluster bombs. The ‘G’ model was a considerable improvement on all the Weasels that had gone before and was deemed by the USAF to be well-equipped for its role.

The introduction of the AGM-88 HARM and the upgrading of the RHAW considerably improved the capability of the F-4G. The HARM has a higher velocity than both of its predecessors, in excess of Mach 2, and greater range. It has a fragmentation warhead in order to ensure total destruction as well as its own guidance system. It can operate in three ways: in ‘pre-briefed’ mode the HARM can be launched at maximum distance to a known target. If ‘target of opportunity’ is selected the missile seeker detects a radar emission and can be fired manually. When it gets within detection range it homes in. The ‘self protect’ option is when the APR-47 RHAW identifies an emission and the Command Launch Computer (CLC) programmes the missile with the appropriate data and launches it. In common with the Shrike and StARM, the versions of the HARM used by the F-16C/F-4G hunter/killer teams could only be successful if the SAM radar operator left their system functioning. Later developments of the HARM got round this problem by ‘remembering’ the location of the enemy emitter.

Capt Bruce Benyshek (ret’d) flew the F-4G with the 81st TFS from Spangdahlem. He said of the aircraft: “I loved it, but it was not an easy airplane to master. It was a rugged airframe, [had] robust engines, and you could hang an incredible amount of stores on it. The centreline could hold 4,000lb. The F-4G was the best SEAD aircraft ever built in spite of having relatively low g-limits when full of fuel or carrying combat stores. The high fuel consumption limited endurance and loiter time. It had a limited air-to-air radar capability, breaking lock relatively easily. The radar did require a lot of experience to work well and took lots of verbal co-ordination between cockpits. It also had the most sensitive and difficult pitch control of any airplane I’ve flown.”

Lt Col Karl Dittmer (ret’d) flew with the 23rd TFS in 1984 and also admired the qualities of the F-4G in the SEAD role: “It was a tremendous platform and the mission was not only challenging but loads of fun. I loved playing ‘cat and mouse’ with SAM sites throughout Germany and kicking their butts. The F-4G was an exceptional weapons system. It was so good we always felt like the cat while playing those games. I seriously doubt we’ve yet regained the capability we lost when the F-4G was sent to the boneyard. I felt everybody should have the capability to see radar threats the way the F-4G did.”

**KILLER F-16s**

The F-4E could carry the same weapons as the F-4G but didn’t have the SEAD acquisition systems. The wing’s elderly ‘E’ models were replaced by the F-16C Fighting Falcon (nicknamed the ‘Viper’) in 1987, which led to the unusual situation of two aircraft types being assigned to a squadron and working together on the same role. The F-4G acting as flight lead due to its greater situational awareness.

The F-16Cs were Block 30 aircraft with new General Electric F-110-GE-100 engines giving a decided advantage over the F-4E in thrust and acceleration. These early F-16s had their limitations though, such as the only SEAD weapon they could carry was the less than ideal Shrike.

Lt Col Dittmer, who flew the F-4E, F-4G and F-16C at Spangdahlem said: “The initial capability of the F-16 in the Wild Weasel mission was about the same as the F-4E. We planned to employ it at very low altitude using the AGM-45 Shrike and use it the same way as the F-4E. However, the F-16 was actually worse at air-to-air than the F-4E as it was limited to within visual range employment. Both aircraft had a 20mm gun, but the only missile the F-16 had at the time was the AIM-9L Sidewinder, whereas the F-4E could employ both the AIM-9 and AIM-7 Sparrow. Still, our Doppler radar was a significant improvement over the F-4’s radar, especially against aircraft attacking from low altitude.”

“The F-4G was the best SEAD aircraft ever built…”

The early Block 30 F-16Cs were not able to use the AGM-88 HARM (unlike the F-4E, later versions of the Fighting Falcon could launch the weapon). Also, it could not operate independently of the F-4G which led to the mixed hunter/killer teams. Lt Col Dittmer recalls: “The F-4G had great situational awareness. Far more than we had in the F-16. If only the threat had allowed for unlimited radio chatter, or if there was some way to transport all that knowledge the F-4G had into the brain of the F-16 pilot, then we would have been much happier. We never could figure out a good solution to that problem, so flying in mixed pairs was a ‘pain’. For the F-16 pilot it required total faith and an unnerving dependency on another aircraft, that’s [a situation] no fighter pilot could ever like, given the mission we had. If those guys in the Weasel didn’t have their ‘ducks in a row’ or if they got shot down, we were really left out on a limb without much to fight back with.”

Only 112 F-4Gs were built and these were divided between Clark AB, George AFB in California and Spangdahlem. Consequently, there were often shortages for missions and exercises due to routine maintenance schedules and the need to fix faults.

Capt Benyshek describes typical training: “We would fly as a two- or four-ship. Typically, a 15-second interval take-off, then go VFR low level and root around ‘playing’ Weasel. There were established training sites, and we also worked random air traffic radars or even Hawk [SAM] batteries.

“The F-4G would pick up radar positions from the APR-38, and then either shoot it himself, or direct the wingman. We practised comm-out, using tactical turns. Once pointed at the threat, we would turn hard into the wingman. This was his cue to pull up about 30°, shoot and turn to follow us.

“The Shrike had many limitations, not the least being it had specific frequency bands. If the ‘Viper’ had his two Shrikes, and the threat you wanted to shoot wasn’t in that band…his missiles were useless. Further, the loft profile exposed him to radar and nearby AAA.” The usual tactical formation flown was line abreast with the aircraft about a mile apart.

When the F-16 was given the capability of carrying the AGM-88 HARM it enhanced its offensive role in the partnership, although the aircraft’s ability to act independently did not change significant ly. However, new tactics were developed to take full advantage of the enhanced capability of the F-16C. Colonel Dan Hampton (ret’d) flew with the 23rd TFS: “The F-16, by virtue of its magic radar and manoeuvrability, acted as the close air-to-air escort and back-up HARM shooter. We primarily used the F-4G to target the pop-up mobile threats whose locations rapidly changed.

“The F-16 was employed with HARMs in one of two ways. In general terms, a ‘range-known shot’ was against a specific site, usually a strategic SAM, for which we had co-ordinates. All the targeting information was programmed into the HARM system by the pilot before the mission. Since a HARM shot from an F-16 doesn’t get real-time information, the probability of kill depends on the pilot being as close to his programmed parameters as possible. Sounds easy, but at 550 KTAS [Knots True Air Speed] at 250ft or in the chaos of combat it can be tough.

“The other method is called the ‘rangeunknown shot’. The F-4G located an emitting radar and pointed the F-16 at it. Which meant getting a lot closer to the SAM you were trying to kill. I need to emphasize that both of these F-16 delivery profiles solely depended on the F-4G’s capability to see the emitter, determine its location and range, and pass that to the F-16.”

In 1988, United States Air Forces in Europe (USAFE) placed a greater emphasis on the Weasel role in negating Warsaw Pact integrated air defence systems (IADS). It also ensured support for the mission by deploying jamming platforms to disrupt the enemy’s communication and surveillance radars. General Dynamics EF-111A Aardvarks at RAF Upper Heyford, Oxfordshire and Lockheed EC-130H Hercules at Sembach AB in West Germany were used in this role as well as US Navy and US Marine Corps Grumman EA-6B Prowlers.

Under cover of this jamming umbrella the SEAD F-4Gs and F-16Cs would target specific SAM sites with the intention of rendering them inoperable. The effectiveness of a SEAD mission was not determined by the number of SAM or AAA sites destroyed, but if they were rendered impotent by the intervention of the Wild Weasel hunter/killer team. The ultimate aim of the Weasel mission was to ensure that the radars controlling the IADS were incapable of responding to an air attack. This could mean simply taking the radar off the air for a time. Destroying the site was an added bonus.

DESERT SHIELD

Iraq invading Kuwait in 1990 led to two squadrons of the 52nd TFW deploying to the Middle East. Just prior to this all the F-4Gs in the 480th TFS were transferred to the 81st TFS along with their crews, while the 81st TFS F-16s and their pilots were moved to the 480th. The 81st TFS and 480th TFS deployed to Sheik Isa AB in Bahrain in December 1990 and January 1991 respectively. The 23rd TFS was left as the only mixed F-4G/F-16 unit which was sent to Incirlik AB, Turkey in January.

Lt Col Dittmer recalls this deployment and division of forces: “My brother, Kurt Dittmer, along with a few other 52nd weapons officers came up with the idea for a northern front stationed out of Incirlik AB. The intent was to make Iraq deal with two separate fronts, thus splitting its forces. The plan was fleshed out and was briefed to the Pentagon and approved. The SEAD support for this northern front was the only remaining SEAD forces we had left [at Spangdahlem] – the mixed F-4G/F-16s of the 23rd TFS. My brother was sent to Incirlik in October to start setting things up. I had recently been transferred to 17th AF as a staff officer but was still flying with the 23rd. Fortunately, I was also still a full-up instructor pilot, standardisation evaluator and mission ready, which is why I got to take part.”

The 23rd TFS, in common with other SEAD units in theatre, was very active in the first few days of the war. The unit was called upon to support many strike packages and so intense was the Iraqi air defence environment that no missions took place without Wild Weasel support. Due to the proliferation of AAA and SAM sites ranged against them, they also had to forgo the low-altitude approach tactics for which they had trained in Europe. In addition, the aircrews found themselves coming up against systems they were not familiar with, the Iraqis having had a considerable number designed and built in the West in addition to those from China and numerous Sovietmade systems. However, it did not take long for the Iraqis to realise that their entire IADS was under serious threat. Both in the north and the south they began to turn off their SAM radars for fear of being attacked by Weasels. Dittmer said on this: “The radar threat was practically non-existent. There was talk that we needed to re-role into bomb droppers. We received pressure to start helping our Torrejón F-16 bomb-dropping buddies who we were there to protect. We finally strapped bombs on our ‘Vipers’ and proceeded to bomb the hell out of Iraqi AAA and SAMs, while our F-4Gs buddies wreaked havoc on aircraft shelters and other hardened targets with Mavericks. It was the very essence of why air power is so great – flexibility! And the best part for us was that finally we ‘Viper’ Wild Weasel types were doing our part of the enemy air defence suppression and destruction mission on our own. When the war ended we in the north had been extraordinarily successful. Thousands of sorties were flown, with tons of bombs dropped and lots of targets destroyed, and not one aircraft was lost to enemy fire.”

After returning from the war the unit became an all-F-16C unit in September 1991. On October 1 that year it became the 23rd Fighter Squadron (all USAF tactical fighter squadrons changed title). This brought an end to the F-4G/F-16 hunter/ killer teams.

The 81st FS relinquished its F-4Gs in 1994 and converted to the Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt ll. The 23rd FS retained its F-16Cs in the SEAD role and in 1994 it received Block 50 aircraft. It was the only SEAD unit in USAFE until deactivated in August 2010 when it transferred its aircraft and personnel to the newly created 480th FS; which had been stood down in 1994 when its F-4Gs returned to the US. The 480the FS continues the SEAD mission and is still based at Spangdahlem.
