### Sadaaki Akamatsu, the real "Drunken Master"

Japan's "Pappy Boyington" was the infamous LtJG. Sadaaki (Matsu-chan or Little Pine Tree, Temei or "you" but in a very rude and confrontational manner) Akamatsu, who entered combat during the Sino-Japanese War, and survived the Pacific war without a scratch. Lt. Akamatsu did not correspond to the prototype of the Japanese officer, lover of order, the good customs and the fierce samurai discipline. On the contrary, he was undisciplined, a drunkard, a frequent vistor to the local brothels, and a terrific wrestler and fighter (a Sumo wrestler, and he held a 4th Vodan black belt in Judo). Though, the only thing that no one ever questioned was Akamatsu's mastery of airplane piloting and his boundless courage. He amassed more than 8,000 flight hours during his military career, claimed more than 260 aerial victories in China and boasted of adding another 100 victories during the war in the Pacific! Akamatsu was much like Boyington in many respects: one year and a half older than Boyington (born in July 1910, in Kochi Prefecture), he acquired great flying skills while also battling alcohol, which eventually ruined his life. Both were more than 30 when the Pacific war began - quite old for operational fighter pilots. The two began their fighting careers in China. Most of his air victories were won while he was drunk. Despite this, his supervisors were behind him, as were his comrades who often defended and covered for him. He became an ace in one day in China, and during the last year of the war Akamatsu was selected and assigned to be part of 302nd Kokutai (Air Group), based at Atsugi, tasked with Tokyo's air defense, and later equipped with the Mitsubishi J2M3 Raiden ("Jack"). On April 19th 1945, during an American bombing raid on Tokyo, a large B-29 formation flew unscathed over the Japanese capital under the protection of a strong P-51 Mustang escort; of the few Japanese planes at the Atsugi base, only Akamatasu was in a position to fight, but everyone advised him to stay on the ground, as he could do nothing against approximately 70 powerful P-51s. However, for Akamatsu the word fear did not exist, and he was also totally drunk. So he got in his Raiden and flew in the direction of the enemy formation, blasting from all his guns. Five minutes he faced the enemy Mustangs, managing to shoot down two of them (USAAF confirmed them, but said they were shot down by AAA), until he ran out of ammunition. He then withdrew from the battle under enemy fire. One American who witnessed the battle said “Had he been American he would have been awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor.” Sadaaki Akamatsu continued fighting drunk for the rest of the war and was never shot down. Miraculously he survived the war. After the war he became a fish search pilot for the Kochi Fishery Assocation with a plane his old comrades bought, until he sold it himself, then he ran a cafe in Kochi city, and for many years he battled alcoholism, eventually dying at the age of 69, on February 22, 1980 from alcoholism-induced complications from pneumonia.

### Quotes by Akamatsu

"The time before WWII, fighter planes did not have the great speeds," Akamatsu explained in his autobiography after the War. "It was the pilot's ability that counted, and it became known as the 'one-to-one dogfight era.' The combat of this era wasn't fast but slow and determined. One by one, we announced our identities and fought to the end. We didn't fight in mass formations." Survival in combat depended on a pilot's confidence, training and luck. "I had confidence that I would never be shot down!" wrote Akamatsu. "This confidence helped me survive. But I wasn't only confident, I was also engaged in severe training for more than ten years. It was physical and spiritual training. Through my experience, I could freely manipulate my plane just like my hands and feet. This requires a training of at least ten years!"

