

Fighting around Stalingrad
--------------------------

The situation around Stalingrad had become critical on and around 19 and 20 November 1942, when the Red Army broke through the lines of the Romanian 3rd and 4th Armies, which were situated on the flanks, north and south of the city. The high command lost contact with many of the units and needed to know the situation at the front, so the 7th Fighter Group carried out several recon flights on the 20th, despite very difficult weather conditions and low cloud ceiling. Slt. av. (r) Dicezare flew one of these missions on the 21st, but as he approached a Soviet column he was hit in the fuel tank and had to return to the Karpovka airfield with petrol in the cockpit. Serbanescu then took off on the same mission and on his way back discovered that the Soviet tanks were only a few kilometres south of the airfield. Since slt. av. (r) Dicezare's airplane was ready (the hole in the fuel tank had been plugged with a wooden cork), he was ordered to go to the Romanian Air Corps command and report the situation. He managed to get to Morozovskaya and get Gen. Ermil Gheorghiu on the phone. Two JRS-79Bs were then sent to the surrounded airbase and evacuated as many personnel as they could.

In the meantime, lt. av. Alexandru Serbanescu, who had a lot of infantry experience (he had joined the air force transferring from the elite mountain troops - Vanatori de Munte), organized the defense of the airfield. He used the two AAA batteries (one 37mm and another 75mm) and the guns onboard the airplanes, to fend off the initial Soviet assault. The heavy fire unleashed on the attackers probably made them believe that they were facing an entrenched infantry formation, instead of a fighter group. However, things could not remain this way and, early on 23rd November, all available airplanes took off under heavy artillery barrage from advancing Soviet tanks. Five aircraft were damaged or destroyed during the attempt, but eight managed to reach Tachinskaya. They also took one or even two (in the case of adj. av. (r) Tiberiu Vinca) mechanics in their Bf-109Es. Another seven unserviceable aircraft were left behind. Later, several Ju-52s returned to evacuate some of the personnel left behind. The rest retreated to the Pitovnik airfield, inside the Stalingrad bulge. Some managed to escape on foot from the encirclement.

[excerpt from Denes Bernad, Rumanian Aces of World War 2, Osprey Publishing, 2012]
Once the seriousness of the situation was realised, personnel at Karpovka prepared for defence, and the airfield's few flak guns were organised in an artillery role, their primary job being to protect the aircraft. This was done just in time, for at dusk on 22 November, the first Red Army reconnaissance vehicle appeared on the horizon and was quickly knocked out by the flak guns. Before dawn the next day Soviet tanks arrived in strength. Romanian deliberations on how to meet this threat were cut short by the tanks firing across the airfield. For the airmen, there was only one solution - take to the air, regardless of the attacks and the darkness. Accordingly, all 16 airworthy Bf 109Es were hastily prepared for a night take-off for which their pilots were not trained. Radio equipment and armour was stripped from each fighter to make room for a passenger - either a pilot whose aircraft was unserviceable or a ground-crewman. As soon as the aircraft engines were started, the Russian tanks headed for the airfield,. The first Messerschmitt attempting to take-off suffered a direct hit and crashed in flames. Then two other fighters collided while taking off in the darkness. Both were set on fire. But the flames helped the other pilots see the makeshift runway and they were able to get airborne. All remaining aircraft were able to escape the hell of Karpovka, as well as the nearby airfields not yet overrun by the Soviets. But the crews of the Rumanian flak guns stayed to fight, and most were killed or captured. Twelve Bf 109Es were left behind to fall into Soviet hands, together with large quantities of ammunition, fuel and other materiel.

The remaining fighters were joined by several He-111s and formed the Mixed Group, under the command of lt. cdor. av. Nicolae Iosifescu. Despite the small numbers, they continued to fly the missions they were given and claimed two Hurricanes shot down on 20 January 1943. Another two victories were claimed at the beginning of February. A combat air patrol strafed Soviet troops near Zaporozhye, and stopped their attack, receiving a mention in dispatches for this action. At the end of January, the group, which by now had only a few He-111 and three Bf-109s available, was brought back to Romania for a much needed rest and refit.
