Hawker Tempest Mk V Series 2 NV994
----------------------------------

F/Lt Pierre Clostermann, No. 3 Squadron, No. 122 Wing. B. 112 Hopsten, Germany, April-June 1945

The first of F/Lt Pierre Clostermann's famous No. 3 Squadron Tempests, JF-E NV994, collected from No. 83 Group Support Unit, RAF Dunsfold around 15 April 1945, while No. 3 Sqn were at the Armament Practice Camp, RAF Warmwell. After a ten day break from operations to practice their gunnery technique and practice bombing, the squadron flew to a new base in Germany, B.112 Hopsten (in North Rheine-Westphalia), on April 18, 1945. No 3. Squadron would not get the chance to try its bombing skills on operations before the end of the war - less than three weeks away, though aerial combat was something they did quite a bit. Clostermann shot down two Focke Wulf Fw 190D-9s on April 20 1945, over Dummer Lake (a large lake near Bremen, in Lower Saxony), after a mission in the Bremen-Hamburg sector, with Clostermann himself being shot up by (what appeared to be both Allied and German) Flak, and injured; his injuries kept him from flying until May 3, 1945. 20 April 1945 mission: at 19:36 Clostemann took off from Rheine-Hopsten with another two Tempests, flown by MacIntyre and Gordon, headed to Bremen. An hour later they spotted a formation of Fw-190s that was attacking Allied forces below. In the ensuing battle, Closterman managed to down two Dora-9s, the second one after having to evade six other FW-190s over Bremen. The first one crashed in a ball of fire, and the second one, "White 1" belly landed near Dummer Lake in a water logged field where the "plane threw up a broom of mud" according to Clostermann. Thereafter Clostermann saw the German pilot limp away from his damaged plane, trailing on his parachute. It was later reported that this German pilot succumbed to his wounds a few hours later in an ambulance, perhaps one of the five pilots that IV./JG 51 lost during the final battles. Finally, Clostermann managed to land his badly damaged Tempest in complete darkness, and was glad to find out that his friend Gordon was still alive, after also being hit, and also somehow managing to limp back to base with his shot up Tempest. Photos taken on April 18, 1945 show that NV994 was not marked with Clostermann's scoreboard nor the name "Le Grand Charles" at that time; historical research indicates the name and the scoreboard markings (kills tally) were added after the war, around June 1945. On 1 July 1945, while attempting to land (after a large display of Air Force aircraft pver Copenhagen, Denmark), NV994 was damaged in an accident during a poor landing at Vaerlöse (Clostermann had initially beed detached to B.160 Kastrup, near Copenhagen, but the weather was deemed too bad for an attempted landing there). It was declared Category B (needing repair) and returned to the UK. Following the damage to NV994, Clostermann was re-equipped with another Tempest Mk V - serial NV724, which took over the JF-E code. NV724 then continued in No. 3 Squadron service into late 1945 and also eventually received postwar personal markings (badge and optional Cross of Lorraine).
