## B-52G 58-0183 "Valkyrie"

U.S. Air Force B-52G Stratofortress tail number 58-0183, known as the “Valkyrie.” This aircraft flew Operation Secret Squirrel, Jan. 16-17, 1991, with the following crew (call sign "Doom 36"): aircraft commander, Capt. Alan W. Moe; pilot, Capt. David T. Greer Jr.; pilot augmentee, Capt. Joseph M. Hasbrouck; additional pilot, Maj. Stephen D. Weilbrenner; radar navigator, Capt. Blaise M. Martinick; navigator, 1st Lt. John S. Pyles; navigator augmentee, Capt. Matthew G. Casella; electronic warfare officer, Capt. Anthony Bothwell; gunner, Sgt. Danny L. Parker. In the early morning of Jan. 16, 1991, seven B-52G Stratofortresses took off from Barksdale Air Force Base, La., (2nd BW/596th BS) on a secret mission codenamed “Secret Squirrel.” These B-52s flew more than 14,000 miles in 35 hours – at the time the longest nonstop bombing mission in history, a record which would be held for nearly a decade. The aircraft took off with a load of the Air Force’s newest secret weapon, the AGM-86C Conventional Air-Launched Cruise Missile. These new long range weapons were launched from each B-52 at predetermined locations outside Iraqi airspace, striking the first blows of Operation Desert Storm. The missile’s pinpoint accuracy and high explosive power proved it to be a particularly effective weapon against the forces and infrastructure of Saddam Hussein’s regime. The ‘Valkyrie’ is on display at the Pima County Air Museum, Tucson, AZ.

58-0183 is a G-model of the Boeing B-52G Stratofortress — the “short-tail” variant introduced around 1958. Over its lifetime prior to 1991 it was shuffled among multiple units (“bomb wings”) — as is common for B-52s. During the late 1980s (while assigned to the 97th Bomb Wing at Blytheville AFB, Arkansas), the aircraft received the nose-art and name “Valkyrie.” The artwork — a Norse-mythology-style Valkyrie on horseback, shield bearing the emblem of the Strategic Air Command (SAC) — was painted then. On 9 July 1991, just a few months after Desert Storm, 58-0183 was withdrawn from service and transferred to the 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Center (AMARC) at Davis-Monthan AFB, as part of the U.S. drawdown of B-52G aircraft. Shortly thereafter (by 11 August 1991) it was loaned to the Pima Air & Space Museum in Tucson, Arizona — where it remains on static display.
