BR294
-----

BR294, P/O Donald G. Reid, No. 185 Squadron, RAF Hal Far, Malta, May-June 1942. Don "Shorty" Reid was born in Lacombe, Alberta on June 6, 1922 as a twin in the family with eight children. In October 1940 he enlisted in RCAF and in July 1941 he finished his pilot training. Upon arrival in the United Kingdom at the end of August, he served in quick succession with several units, No. 152, No. 412, No. 616 and No. 19 Squadrons. He remained at the last unit until the end of April 1942. On May 9, 1942 he was dispatched to Malta to take part in Operation Bowery. During the summer weeks he flew combat missions with No. 185 Squadron defending this small but importantly located island. On July 22 while circling above the sea where one of the Spitfires from his unit was shot down, he was jumped by several Bf 109s. During the dogfight he shot down one of the opponents but was overwhelmed by 1./JG 77 aircraft, shot down and KIA, his Spitfire crashed into the sea. During seven weeks of fighting for Malta "Shorty" Reid scored 6+1 kills, 3 probables and 4+1 damaged enemy airplanes. BR294 camouflage was one of the typical schemes sported by the aircraft participating in Operation Bowery flown off USS Wasp. The upper surfaces in the original desert scheme of Dark Earth/Middle Stone were overpainted while on board the carrier, in US Navy Non-specular Blue Gray (close to FS 35189), the lower surfaces remained in Sky.

BR301
-----

Spitfire Mk.Vc serial number BR301, UF-S, 249 Squadron, RAF Hal Far, Malta, July 1942. BR301 was one of the most successful Spitfires fighting on Malta. The aircraft came from the batch of Spitfires flying off the aircraft carrier USS Wasp (CV-7) on May 9, 1942, during Operation Bowery (this time around, as opposed to the previous Operation Calendar from April, that saw almost all newly arrived Spitfires destroyed on the ground by the Luftwaffe, all the Spitfires that arrived on Malta were immediately refueled, pilots changed, and scrambled to intercept the prowling Germans). Like the majority of Spitfires delivered during Operation Bowery, BR301 had the blue shade of Dark Mediterranean Blue applied already on board of the carrier, having the original desert scheme of the original 601 Squadron (Dark Earth and Middle Stone) shown slightly through; much debate there is around about what the exact shade of "Malta Blue" that was, my interpretation is that it should be close to, if not identical, to USN grey, that would have been readily available on USS Wasp.. The lower surfaces were re-painted in Sky Blue including the national markings. The original armament consisting of four cannons was reduced to two in the wing inner gun bays and two machine guns were installed outwards. BR301 coded UF-S first served with No. 601 Squadron however its greatest glory awaited it at No. 249 Squadron where it was transferred. Here it became an "aircraft of the Aces". Between July 7 and July 13 P/O John McElroy claimed four aerial victories flying it and on July 27, a rising star. Sgt. George "Screwball" Beurling shot down four enemy aircraft in one mission and two days later he claimed another kill with BR301. During the month of July Sqn/Ldr Richard Mitchell and F/Sgt John Rae claimed further kills. On July 29, BR301 was damaged beyond repair and struck off charge, having flown 54 hours in three weeks! I am attaching a number of reference photos from around the same time BR301 was flying - all the Malta Spits were flown heavily, and both pilots and airframes were under tremendous amounts of stress; these machines were stained, dusty, and showing a lot of wear and tear, due to Malta's demanding climate, and the fact they were flown incessantly. Saluting the Defenders of Malta! Here is a link to an article explaining why Beurling was nicknamed Screwball <https://www.canada.ca/en/department-national-defence/maple-leaf/rcaf/migration/2018/how-screwball-beurling-got-his-nickname.html>

BR349
-----

BR349, P/O John L. Boyd, No. 185 Squadron, RAF Takali (Ta'Qali), Malta, May 1942. "Tony" Boyd was born on May 20, 1919 in Brynestown, Queensland. Before he joined RAAF in 1940 he had worked on a sheep farm. After the basic training on Tiger Moth airplanes he was sent to Canada for advanced training at Camp Borden (Ontario). After his arrival in the United Kingdom in July 1941 he was enlisted into the completion training at No. 59 OTU and in September, with the rank of Sgt. attached to No. 135 Squadron. In October he was transferred to No. 242 Squadron which trained for overseas deployment. Upon arrival in Malta off HMS Ark Royal carrier in November 1941 Sgt. John Livingstone Boyd was credited with his early victories (four and two shared) flying Hurricanes with No. 242 and 185 Squadrons. After No. 185 was re-equipped with Spitfires on May 14, 1942, Boyd, flying Spitfire Mk. Vc BR349/3-C, scored his only confirmed kill in a Spitfire, shooting down Bf 109F piloted by Lt. Alfred Hammer from 4./JG 53. Several hours later, flying the very same aircraft, Boyd was killed in a dogfight with Italian C.202 and Re 2001. BR349 camouflage was one of the typical schemes sported by the aircraft participating in Operation Bowery flown off USS Wasp on May 14, 1942 - upper surfaces in Navy colors of Dark Slate Grey/Extra Dark Sea Grey and lower surfaces in Sky.
